SEX, DEATH, DRUGS AND THE WORST OF TIMES

The Australian Newspaper; 17th February 2025

The Biggest scandals of the century in Australian Football
by Michael Warner

Since the turn of the century, dozens of controversies have made their
way to the front page of the nation's newspapers. We list the biggest
off-field scandals and sagas to taint the code since 2000.

1. ESSENDON DRUGS SAGA

Footy's greatest scandal broke on February 5, 2013, when Essendon coach
James Hird, president David Evans and chief executive Ian Robson
fronted a snap press conference at AFL House in Docklands to
"self-report" the club's use of "exotic substances" during the 2012
season. It was the beginning of a four-year saga that would rip the
game to shreds, destroy life-long friendships and expose the seedy
underbelly of the AFL's justice system. The Bombers were smashed -
first by being removed from the 2013 finals under a contentious deal
with the AFL - and later in 2015 when 34 of its players were wiped out
for doping by the International Court of Arbitration for Sport,
forcing the league to strip Jobe Watson of his 2012 Brownlow
Medal. The drugs saga took its darkest turn in 2017 when exiled
Essendon coach James Hird attempted to take his own life. Essendon has
never fully recovered.

2. WAYNE CAREY AFFAIR

The king of football led North Melbourne to premiership glory in 1996
and 1999 before a secret affair with Kelli Stevens, the wife of
teammate Anthony Stevens, blew his career and the Kangaroos apart in
March 2002. The affair was exposed after the pair were seen together
in a toilet during a party at teammate Glenn Archer's home. Carey quit
the Roos at a teary press conference and shifted to play for Adelaide,
but his game was never the same. Tensions over the scandal have
lingered ever since. When Steven's son River was drafted by North last
year, Kelli implored the football world to move on from the saga. "The
past is where it belongs - behind us." Carey said in 2022 the affair
had haunted him for the past 20 years.

3. EAGLES DRUG CRISIS

A culture of rampant illicit drug abuse at the Eagles exploded into
public view after the club's 2006 premiership triumph, headlined by
the fall of drug-addled pin-up boy Ben Cousins. A top-secret AFL
report into the crisis laid bare the toxic nature of the drug-fuelled
crisis and the club's attempt to cover it up. Cocaine, speed, ice,
ecstasy, marijuana and prescription drugs were abused by numerous
Eagles players from as early as 1998. In an incident during an
end-of-season trip to Las Vegas, midfielder Chad Fletcher was strapped
to a hospital bed after collapsing and "flat-lining". Inexplicably the
Eaglers were never punished by the AFL for breinging the game into
disrepute. The scandal also exposed serious flaws with the game's
so-called three-strikes illicit drugs testing policy.

4. ALISHA HORAN DIES

In February 2000, Geelong barmaid Alisha Horan overdosed and died from
a lethal cocktail of alcohol, ecstasy, amphetamines and heroin in room
1265 at Melbourne's Hyatt Park Hotel after a drug-fuelled bender with
Cats great Gary Ablett Sr. Ablett was later convicted and fined for
possession and use of heroin and ecstasy. Horan's family has never
forgiven Ablett, who was inducted into the AFL Hall of Fame five years
later amid furore over whether it was appropriate. Ablett said in 2020
"I can't tell you how much that shattered me, how much it broke me as
a person. It still grieves me to this day."

5. CARLTON SALARY CAP

Carlton was brought to its knees in 2002 after an AFL investigation
found the club guilty of systemic salary cap breaching. Through brazen
under-the-table cash payments or elaborate company trust structures,
Blues players pocketed hundreds of thousands of dollars outside the
rules. Carlton was fined almost $1m and stripped of two seasons of
prized draft selections. Then-AFL chief executive Wayne Jackson
declared Carlton "deserved everything they got, and arguably, some
more".

6. MELBOURNE TANKING

Am AFL probe into claims Melbourne had deliberately lost matches in
2009 to secure the first two picks in the national draft was launched
in 2012 after ex-Demon Brock McLean blew the whistle on national
television. The AFL announced its findings in February 2013, declaring
Melbourne had not "tanked" to lose matches. Instead, the club was
fined $500,000 and coach Dean Bailey and footy boss Chris Connolly
were suspended for the lesser charge of conduct prejudicial to the
interests of the game. The AFL's then deputy chief, Gillon McLachlan,
famously declared "I actually don't know what the definition of
tanking is." But in 2019, the Herald Sun published 80 pages of secret
AFL integrity unit transcripts, exposing how several club officials
had indeed confessed to a conspiracy to lose matches, including a
stunning confession from Bailey. "What was said to me was, if I win
games I would get sacked," he said. "I was threatened.. it was a
terrible thing."

7. HAWTHORN RACISM

Shocking claims a young Indigenous Hawks player and his partner were
pressured by club officials to terminate a pregnancy amid a subculture
of racism at Hawthorn during the club's goldern premiership era of
2008-15 were first aired by the ABC in grand final week 2022,
triggering an eight-month AFL investigation. But the probe fizzled out
with league boss Gillon McLachlan revealing at a snap press conference
in May 2023 that the league had struck a deal with lawyers for the
Indigenous players in which "no adverse findings have been made
against any of the indivduals against whom allegations have been
made". The dispute was later settled out of court.

8. KING KONG GAFFE

Praised for his immediate response after Adam Goodes was called an
"Ape" by a 13-year-old girl at a match between Sydney and Collingwood
in 2013, Eddie McGuire's goodwill faded days later after a shocking
gaffe on Triple M radio. When live on air, McGuire suggested the Swans
legend be used to promote the King Kong musical. Goodes, who would go
on to win Australian of the Year in 2014, was devastated while the
Swans demanded action from the AFL. McGuire apologised and conceded he
"was on heavy-duty painkillers" when he made the comments, but he was
not punished by the league. Te gaffe was part of a chain of events
that culminated in the booing of Goodes by crowds across the
country. The dual Brownlow Medallist never fully engaged with the game
he dominated after his 2015 retirement.

9. "DO BETTER"

Collingwood's decision during the 2020 season to commission a report
into historic allegations of racism at the club blew up spectacularly
in its face. The club kept the "Do Better" report - which found there
had been a culture of "Systemic racism" at the Pies - under weaps
before it was leaked in February 2021. At a hastily convened press
conference, McGuire claimed it was an "historic and proud day". But he
resigned days later amid a firestorm in an emotional end to his
22-year reign at the helm of the game's biggest club.

10. CROWS CAMP

Adelaide's devestating loss to Richmond in the 2017 grand final was
the driver behind a toxic pre-season camp held by the club in
Queensland in Janurary 2018 where players were subjected to extreme
physical, mental and allegedly cultural abuse. Claims of what
transpired including players being blindfolded, tied to trees and
subjected to personal taunts trigged an AFL integrity unit
investigation. The Crows were cleared of wrongdoing, but a series of
participants - including champion Eddie Betts and Josh Jenkins - have
since confirmed the trauma some in the group suffered. The Crows have
not made finals since.

11. EXECUTIVES RESIGN

In July 2017, two married AFL executives - Simon Lethlean and Richard
Simkiss - were forced out of head office for "inapproriate" sexual
relationships with younger female staffers. "They are separate matters
and distressing to a number of people," league boss Gillon McLachlan
said at a press conference at AFL House. League chairman Richard
Goyder later said: "I often say to people, has a problem ever sorted
itself out by sweeping it under the carpet? They don't. If we hadn't
made that decision, the on-going (media coverage) .. can you imagine?
Clearly the two guys and the AFL made the right decision, otherwise it
would be a bleeding sore. It was just the right thing to do." Lethlean
and Simkiss both apologised for their conduct.

12. CROWS CAP RORTS

In December 2012, a salary cap cheating scandal erupted at Adelaide
surrounding secret agreements between Crows chiefs and star forward
Kurt Tippett, which had not been disclosed in copies of contracts
submitted to the AFL. Crows chief executive Steven Trigg was fined
$50,000 and suspended for six months while Adelaide was fined $300,000
and lose selections across two national drafts. Tippett was also fined
and banned for 11 matches.

13. WHITFIELD SAGA

Expansion club GWS Giants was fined and stripped of draft points in
2016 after it was claimed club officials had helped rising star Lachie
Whitfield hide from testers after he used illicit drugs. The story was
leaked in August 2016 just days after veter administrator Graeme
"Gubby" Allan was parachuted into the top job in Collingwood's
football department over the demoted Neil Balme. Allan, Whitfield and
Craig Lambert all accepted sanctions for conduct prejudicial to the
AFL.

14. ST KILDA SCHOOLGIRL

A group of St Kilda players were humiliated in 2010 when a teenager,
dubbed the "St Kilda schoolgirl", released a series of explicit photos
of them on the Internet. She was ordered by the Federal Court to stop
publishing the images before top player manager Ricky Nixon was
sensationally stripped of his agent accreditation after admitting to
"inapproriate dealings" with the girl.

15. TALIA BROS LEAKING

Claims the 2015 elimination final at the MCG between Adelaide and the
Western Bulldogs was compromised by the leaking of "game-sensitive"
information triggered a 63-day AFL integrity unit investigation. The
case surrounded allegations that disaffected Dogs defender Michael
Talia had leaked parts of the game plan to his brother, star Crows
defender Daniel Talia, in the days before hte match. Talia and the
Crows were cleared of wrongdoing, but secret documents later exposed
the Dogs fury at the league's handling of the probe and its
exoneration of the brothers.

16. ROOF-TILER RORT

GWS was sensationally caught out in 2011 after it was revealed the
club had secretly employed the roof-tiler father of star recruit Tom
Scully on a six-year contract worth $680,000 to help lure his son away
from the Melbourne Football Club. THe Giants were forced to include
Phil Scully's wages in its salary cap after the AFL found his hiring
as a recruiter was directly related to Tom's decision to quit the
Demons after just two seasons. Tom said his father's offer only came
after he'd already agreed to play for GWS.

17. DEMONS IN HELL

Melbourne's glorious 2021 premiership was soon overshadowed by
allegations of cultural and illicit-drug issues. The Dees went to war
with former president Glen Bartlett, who had been forced out abruptly
in Aptil 2021. The crisis escalated in 2024 when a former club doctor
sensationally admitted to conduction "off-the-books" illicit-drug
tests - allegedly authorised by the AFL - to help players evade
detection on match days, before Demons utility Joel Smith was charged
and later suspended for almost give years for cocaine trafficking. The
Bartlett dispute was settled out of court.

18. THE RAT PACK

Despite their on-field feats, a series of off-field incidents
involving Collingwood players led to the coining of the infamous "Rat
Pack" moniker. The group's core members included Alan Didak, Heath
Shaw, Dane Swan and Ben Johnson. THe most serious incident came in
2007 when Didak was found to have been a passenger in a car with Hells
Angel bikie Christopher Wayne Huadon just days before Hudson went on a
shooting rampage through Melbourne's CBD killing one person. Didak and
Shaw were together the next year when Shaw crashed his ute into two
parked cars while nearly three times over the legal limit. The pair
initially lied to the club about Didak's involvement before
backflipping. "Didak will be accused of the Kennedy shooting next,"
Pies boss Eddie McGuire damously declared before it was confirmed he
had indeed been a passenger in the car.

19. LUKE'S LEWD IMAGE

Just this year (2025) Carlton was forced into damge control after a
"dick pic" was posted on president Luke Sayer's social media account
tagging a high-ranking female executive at Bupa, one of Carlton's
major sponsors. After two weeks of silence, the AFL eventually
investigated, clearing Sayers of breaching league rules, saying his X
account had been compromised. But Sayers quit anyway "to continue to
prioritise time with his family". It remains unclear who gained access
to Sayers' account and why, but the former PwC boss has continually
protested his innocence: "I did not post the image, either
deliberately or accidentally."

20. SUN BURN

An explosive Queensland Crime and Corruption Commission investigation
in 2014 lifted the lid on widespread illicit drug abuse at the Gold
Coast Suns. Star code-hopper Kamichael Hunt had confessed to police
how he would party for days without sleep and hide cocaine in his golf
bag. A dozen Suns players wre implicated. In 2015, Suns star Harley
Bennell was at the centre of another major drug durore after photos
emerged of him in a Tasmanian hotel with lines of white powder.

21. FALL OF FEVOLA

Carlton forward Brendan Fevola disgraced himself at the 2009 Brownlow
Medal count at Crown Casino after becoming heavily intoxicated. His
antics included giving Chris Judd a "pressure-point" hold, knocking a
beer out of Adam Cooney's hand and kissing Ryan O'Keefe. It was the
end of the road for Fevola at the Blues and he moved to Brisbane,
where his AFL career fizzled out. Fevola battled demons with gambling
and drinking, but escaped penalty in 2010 after taking a nude photo of
model Lara Bingle in the shower. He's since rehabilitated his life and
is a co-host of a breakfast radio show.

22. UMPIRE BETTING

The home of AFL umpire Michael Pell was raided by Victoria Police in
2022 over allegations he was part of a Brownlow Medal betting
syndicate. It centred on bets relating to alleged Brownlow voting
leaks from games where he officiated. Pell was stood down by the AFL
and hasn't umpired an official game since. But more than two years
later, it's still unclear whether charges will be laid.

23. STEPHENSON BETS BAN

Collingwood young gun Jaydn Stephenson was slapped with the heaviest
gambling sanction in the game's history in 2019 after admitting to
placing $36 worth of bets on three Magpies matches in which he was
involved. Stephenson was suspended for 10 matches, fined $20,000 by
the AFL and gave up $50,000 in match payments.

24. PIES DRUG SHOCK

Collingwood teammates Lachie Keeffe and Josh Thomas were wiped out for
two years after testing positive to banned muscle-boosting drug
clenbuterol in 2015. The duo had been partying at the St Kilda
Festival where they had taken cocaine laced with the substance. In
2018, promising Pies youngster Sam Murray tested positive for cocaine
on match day after taking the drug midweek. He copped an 18-month ban
and never played again for the club.

25. CARO DROWING JIBE

Collingwood president Eddie McGuire issued an "unreserved apology" in
June 2016 after joking live on raid about drowning female football
journalist Caroline Wilson. "I reckon we should start a campaign for a
one-person slide next year,: McGuire said of the Big Freeze event at
the MCG, where celebrities plunge into ice to raise money for motor
neurone disease. "Caoline Wilson, I'll put in the $10,000 straight
away, make it $20,000, and if she stays under, $50,000". Fellow
broadcasters Danny Frawley and James Brayshaw also apologised for
comments made in the exchange.

