MAKING THEIR MARK: the 50 most inflential figures in footy

The Australia Newspaper; 11th March 2025

(rewritten from 50 to 1 not 1 to 50)

50 Ross Lyon, St Kilda coach

The Saints need some wins, but his recent "Cotton on" barb shows Ross
the Boss can still goad with the best.

49 Michael Voss, Carlton coach

Adding premiership coach to a three-time premiership captain CV would
elevate him to rare company.

48 Leigh Matthews, Foxtel/3AW broadcaster

Still footy's voice of reason and a Brisbane Lions board member.

47 Gerard Healy, Foxtel/SEN broadcaster

An old-school campaigner who still works the phone better than most
after a day in the surf.

46 Harley Reid, Eagles young gun

He's bare;y shaving, but Reid's call on his future will affect the
fortunes of multiple clubs and dictate the terms of the trade period.

45 Damien Hardwick, Gold Coast Suns coach

If anyone can reverse the fortunes of the game's $300m disaster club,
it's Dimma.

44 Sonja Hood, North Melbourne president

A smart, independent thinker who has done the hard yards rebuilding
the Roos.

43 Denise Bowden, AFL commissioner

The Northern Territory Indigenous leader from a famouse football
family was appointed to the commission in February with the hope of
bridging the gap between the AFL and First Nations people. This year's
Indigenous All Stars match was a good start.

42 Alastair Clarkson, North Melbourne coach

Bruised from the Hawthorn racism fiasco, Clarko is down but not out as
the Roos begin their climb up the ladder.

41 Peter Jess, concussion campaigner

The game's biggest agitator has championed the cause of hundreds of
past players who have fallen on hard times.

40 Eddie McGuire JAMTV boss

Just when you think he's going to drop off the list he calws his way
back. Hosting and producing footy shows for rival networks Nine and
Seven.

39 Nick Daicos, Collingwood star

The game's new No. 1 player at the game's biggest club equals
commercial gold.

38 Garry Lyon, Foxtel/SEN broadcaster

More airtime than Jordan and more political than he lets on.

37 Sam Mitchell, Hawthorn coach

Driving the most exciting group in the game with a killer instinct

36 Craig McRae, Collingwood coach

Highly-competitive frontman for the game's biggest club who does it
his own way.

35 Gerard Whateley, Foxtel/SEN broadcaster

A consummate media performer with boundless self-belief. Incredibly
ambitious and revered by his audience.

34 Chris Gagan, Brisbane Lions coach

A father figure to his players who went through hell during the
Hawthorn racism debacle before tasting the ultimate success.

33 Luke Beveridge, Western Bulldogs coach

When there's a bee in his bonnet, Beveridge doesn't hold back. Will be
highly sought after when his time at the Kennel comes to an end.

32 Steve Hocking, Geelong CEO

Esconced at the Cattery where his knowledge of the inner workings at
AFL House has paid big dividends.

31 Greg Swann. Brisbane Lions CEO

A premiership was just reward for taking charge of a club on its knees
in 2014.

30 Peter Malinauskas, SA Premier

The Gather Round visionary is showing other state premiers how it's
done.

29 Caroline Wilson, Nine journalist

"Football's First Lady" is a formidable force who is always
well-briefed.

28 Jeremy Rockliff, Tasmanian Premier

To deliver a team for his state and the AFL's 19th licence, Rockliff
must make good on his pledge to provide a 23,000-seat roofed stadium
at Macquarie Point.

27 Stephen Meade, AFL general counsel

The AFL's top executive on integrity, concussion and racism
litigation. Never a dull moment.

26 David Matthews, GWS chief executive

In a year the AFL has vowed to finally address concerns over the
western Sydney market, Matthews is one of the game's key
administrators.

25 Trevor Nis bett, AFL consultant

After two decades at the Eagles, Nisbett has been tasked by Andrew
Dillon to understake a wide-rangimg review into the relationshop
between clubs and head office.

24 Peter Gordon, Gordon Legal senior partner

The ex-Dogs boss is the league's go-to lawyer for serious off-field
litigation including racism and concussion.

23 Brian Walsh, AFL corporate affairs chief

The former police rounds journo-turned-crisis-manager controls all the
messaging coming out of AFL House.

22 Steve Crawley, Fox Sports managing director

Pulls the strings at Fox Footy which has undergone a major revamp led
by stand-alone commentary teams and the advent of Super Saturday.

21 Patrick Dangerfield, AFLPA president

Champion midfielder who speaks for the game's 800 players.

20 Craig Hutchison, SEN chief executive

Once toe subject of ridicule for his lofty ambitions, Hutchison has
dealt his way up to footy's big boys' table.

19 Sam Weir, Herald Sun editor

The man at the helm of Australia's biggest newspaper that sets the
football agenda.

18 Paul Marsh, AFL Player's Association chief executive

Stands between the AFL and a major overhaul of the game's contentious
illicit drugs policy. Would be wise to embrace the emergence of the
FifthQtr Foundation.

17 Tom Petroro, Player Agent

Sits at this ranking by virtue of having so many players and media
performers on his company's books.

16 David Koch, Port Adelaide president

The long-time Power boss has some support for a lilt at the AFL
commission. The leading voice in South Australian football.

15 Jeff Howard, Seven West Media CEO

The Seven supremo will be picking up the phone to Andrew Dillon if the
new TV deal doesn't start paying dividends.

14 Craig Kelly, Collingwood CEO

Lost some skin in last year's racism saga, but remains a formidable,
highly-oponionated powerbroker-turned-administrator.

13 Kane Cornes, Seven/SEN broadcaster

Footy's agent provocateur. Love him or loathe him, the footy world
reacts to everything he has to say.

12 Patrick Delany, Foxtel CEO

Will navigate Foxtel's mid-season sale to DAZN as the pay-TV company
invests more than ever before in AFL football.

11 Stuart Fox, MCC chief executive

Would be an ideal successor for Dillon one day. Manages the nation's
biggest stadium and worked at Geelong and Hawthorn during periods of
success.

10 Chris Scott, Geelong coach

A master coach who gets the game's politics, mixes in the right
circles and uses the media to his advantage.

9 Paul Connors, Player agent

By far and away the game's No 1 manager. Connors gets his players and
coaches where they want to go. Lays low until October.

8 Laura Kane, AFL football operations boss

Her appointment was celebrated but clubs have made clear Kane's
department needs serious bolstering.

7 Kerry Stokes, Seven West Media chairman

The business tycoon writing the second-biggest cheques in football
will want some bang for his buck.

6 Michael Miller, NewsCorp Australia CEO

The most senior person at the most unfluential media company in the
country.

5 Andrew Ireland, AFL commissioner

An understated but respected football person who understands the
critical norther markjets better than anyone.

4 Richard Goyder, AFL commission chairman

Footy's invisible leader who signs off on all the big moves is seeking
another three-year term, but should give someone else a go.

3 Andrew Pridham, Sydney Swans chairman

The elder statesman of the 18 club presidents, Pridham is seen by many
as the next AFL chairman. A connected businessman with his finger on
the game's pulse.

2 Brendon Gale, Tasmania Devils CEO

All eyes are on project Tasmania and the former Tigers boss faces an
uphill battle uniting the state, delivering a new stadium and securing
generous list concessions from head office.

1 Andrew Dillon, AFL chief executive

Footy's top dog has respect, but is too indecisive. Needs to recruit a
strong 2IC and shake-up an under-performing executive team.
